---
template: blog-post
title: "Dividends: Doing Nothing And Getting Paid?"
slug: /-1
date: 2020-11-05 13:36
description: "Dividends introduction "
featuredImage: /assets/screenshot-2020-11-05-at-13.33.54.png
---
`Image source: investorplace.com`



“Money for Nothing” was a popular song in the 80’s, but today the title best describes the feeling investors have when it comes to dividends. Simply put, dividend distribution is a way for companies to share the wealth generated by its operations. When a dividend is paid out, each shareholder receives a slice of the company’s earnings pie, typically on a quarterly basis. The idea of simply buying shares and waiting for the dividend payments sounds attractive to many investors. And almost too good to be true, in our opinion.

So why do firms choose to distribute their earnings to shareholders? One of the motives behind the pay-out decision that is often put forward is to please shareholders and attract more investors. Many investors prefer the steady stream of income provided by dividend payments. Companies tend to keep their dividends relatively stable over time. As opposed to the share price, dividends don’t fluctuate, and they are not directly correlated to one another. A so-called dividend-investing strategy, which means only investing in dividend-paying stocks, is pursued by a number of investors. In addition, what is a shareholder ultimately looking for? Yes, you’ve guessed it, a return on the investment. An investor in a firm’s stock can get a return in two main ways: (1) an appreciation of the stock price, or (2) through dividend payments. So paying out is a way for a company to share profits with its shareholders and offer them a return on investment. Another main reason to distribute dividends is the fact that dividends reflect, to a certain extent, the financial well-being of a firm. A firm that pays a steady dividend sends a message to investors and competitors that it is financially strong. It says “we are strong, profitable, and we want our investors to earn a positive return”. The theory that dividends send a message is referred to as the dividend signalling hypothesis. We will tell you all about this fascinating theory in a later post, so make sure to regularly check out our blog!

Finally, why would a firm decide to not pay any dividends? Start-ups and companies in high-growth phases are less likely to pay dividends. They use the cash to reinvest in growth initiatives, while bigger and mature companies with slower growth tend to pay out cash to shareholders. Also, some firms use cash to buy back shares, which results in fewer shares in the stock market, and higher earnings per share. Finally, and probably the most obvious reason to not pay out is if there is not enough cash or access to cash to begin with. When a company faces financial difficulties, a dividend payment might not even get approved by the board of directors.

We hope you enjoyed our first introductory post on dividends! Stay tuned for more!